Document the Multiple Persistence Units support (#11826)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/hibernate-orm.adoc

# drop and create the database at startup (use `update` to only update the schema)
quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation=drop-and-create
----

> Note that these configuration properties are not the same ones as in your typical Hibernate ORM configuration file: these drive Quarkus configuration properties,

Reviewer: '_...file: these drive Quarkus..._' -> this is a bit confusing. Do you actually need to say that 'they are not the same...'? Isn't enough to say 'Note that these configuration properties drive the Quarkus configuration properties, which often will map to Hibernate configuration properties, but could have different names and don't necessarily map 1:1 to each other.

Also, it's to clear what 'drives' mean.

Even better if you could name 'these' properties - 'Note that the datasource configuration properties drive (supply, produce, are the source for ??) the Quarkus configuration properties, which often will map to Hibernate configuration properties but they could have different names and don't necessarily map 1:1 to each other.

Author: Thanks @andreamussap ! I applied your other suggestions. For this one, I simplified things a bit by removing the `drive` part which was indeed confusing.

        this.name = name;
    }
}
----

> To load some SQL statements when Hibernate ORM starts, add an `import.sql` in the root of your resources directory.

Reviewer: Suggestion - To load SQL statements when Hibernate ORM starts, add an `import.sql` file to the root of your resources directory. This script can contain any SQL DML statements. Make sure to terminate each statement with a semicolon.

Want to start a PostgreSQL server on the side with Docker?

[source,shell]
----
docker run --ulimit memlock=-1:-1 -it --rm=true --memory-swappiness=0 \
           --name postgres-quarkus-hibernate -e POSTGRES_USER=hibernate \
           -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=hibernate -e POSTGRES_DB=hibernate_db \
           -p 5432:5432 postgres:10.5
----

This will start a non-durable empty database: ideal for a quick experiment!
====

[[multiple-persistence-units]]
=== Multiple persistence units

==== Setting up multiple persistence units

[WARNING]
====
This feature is still experimental.
It is considered stable and usable in production but the configuration properties and CDI integration might evolve depending on your feedback.

If you are using this feature, any feedback (even just to say it fulfills your requirements) is very welcome on our link:{quarkus-mailing-list-index}[quarkus-dev mailing list].
====

> Starting with Quarkus 1.7, you can define multiple persistence units using the Quarkus configuration properties approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with Quarkus 1.7.0.Final, you can define multiple persistence units using the Quarkus configuration properties approach.
```

Author: It should have been 1.8 so I fixed and I prefer keeping it this way (especially since CR1 already has it).

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.db-kind=h2
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:h2:mem:default;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1

quarkus.hibernate-orm.dialect=org.hibernate.dialect.H2Dialect
quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation=drop-and-create
----

Using a map based approach, it is possible to define named persistence units:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.datasource."users".db-kind=h2 <1>
quarkus.datasource."users".jdbc.url=jdbc:h2:mem:users;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1

quarkus.datasource."inventory".db-kind=h2 <2>
quarkus.datasource."inventory".jdbc.url=jdbc:h2:mem:inventory;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1

quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".database.generation=drop-and-create <3>
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".datasource=users <4>
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".packages=org.acme.model.user <5>

quarkus.hibernate-orm."inventory".database.generation=drop-and-create <6>
quarkus.hibernate-orm."inventory".datasource=inventory
quarkus.hibernate-orm."inventory".packages=org.acme.model.inventory
----
<1> Define a datasource named `users`.
<2> Define a datasource named `inventory`.
<3> Define a persistence unit called `users`.
<4> Define the datasource used by the persistence unit.

> <5> This configuration property is important but we will discuss it a bit later.

Reviewer 3: Do you think we can add a link to the appropriate section?

Author: Ah sorry, I should have pinged you too :). 

I don’t want to do it as I prefer people read the doc in order.

Reviewer 3: Makes sense.

<6> Define a persistence unit called `inventory` pointing to the `inventory` datasource.

[NOTE]
====
You can mix the default datasource and named datasources or only have one or the other.
====

[NOTE]
====
The default persistence unit points to the default datasource by default.
For named persistence units, the `datasource` property is mandatory.
You can point your persistence unit to the default datasource by setting it to `<default>`
(which is the internal name of the default datasource).

It is perfectly valid to have several persistence units pointing to the same datasource.
====

==== Attaching model classes to persistence units

> There are two distinct ways to attach model classes to persistence units and they should not be mixed:

Reviewer: suggestion: 'There are two ways to attach model classes to persistence units, and they should not be mixed.'

* Via the `packages` configuration property;
* Via the `@io.quarkus.hibernate.orm.PersistenceUnit` package-level annotation.

If both are mixed, the annotations are ignored and only the `packages` configuration properties are taken into account.

Using the `packages` configuration property is simple:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation=drop-and-create
quarkus.hibernate-orm.packages=org.acme.model.defaultpu

quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".database.generation=drop-and-create
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".datasource=users
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".packages=org.acme.model.user
----

This configuration snippet will create two persistence units:

* The default one which will contain all the model classes under the `org.acme.model.defaultpu` package, subpackages included.
* A named `users` persistence unit which will contain all the model classes under the `org.acme.model.user` package, subpackages included.

> It is possible to attach several packages to a persistence unit:

Reviewer: 'You can attach several packages to a persistence unit:'

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".packages=org.acme.model.shared,org.acme.model.user
----

All the model classes under the `org.acme.model.shared` and `org.acme.model.user` packages will be attached to the `users` persistence unit.

It is also supported to attach a given model class to several persistence units.

[NOTE]
====
Model classes need to be consistently added to a given persistence unit.
Meaning all dependent model classes of a given entity (mapped super classes, embeddables...) are required to be attached to the persistence unit.
As we are dealing with the persistence unit at the package level, it should be simple enough.
====

[WARNING]
====
Panache entities can be attached to only one persistence unit.

> For entities attached to several persistence units, you cannot use Panache.

Reviewer 2: This is confusing. [Here](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/11826/files#diff-47831eaea1f7b8c85191d0fb3e7e96dcR283 ) we propose how to attach an entity to several PUs but now we're saying to not use Panache in case that happens?

Author: Yes. Thus this sentence.

Reviewer 2: Then I think the sentence `It is also supported to attach a given model class to several persistence units` needs to be removed?

Reviewer 2: Ah you're referring to Hibernate, not Panache, now I get it

Author: Yes, exactly :).

You can mix the two approaches though and mix Panache entities and traditional entities where multiple persistence units are required.

If you have a use case for that and clever ideas about how to implement it without cluttering the simplified Panache approach,
contact us on the link:{quarkus-mailing-list-index}[quarkus-dev mailing list].
====

The second approach to attach model classes to a persistence unit is to use package-level `@io.quarkus.hibernate.orm.PersistenceUnit` annotations.
Again, the two approaches cannot be mixed.

To obtain a configuration similar to the one above with the `packages` configuration property, create a `package-info.java` file with the following content:

[source,java]
----
@PersistenceUnit("users") <1>
package org.acme.model.user;

import io.quarkus.hibernate.orm.PersistenceUnit;
----
<1> Be careful, use the `@io.quarkus.hibernate.orm.PersistenceUnit` annotation, not the JPA one.

[CAUTION]
====

> We only support setting `@PersistenceUnit` at the package level,

Reviewer 2: Package, field and parameter levels according to the sources :wink:

Author: No. It's used for field and parameters for injection. Not to attach entities to the persistence units. Thus the precision and the second part of the sentence.

Using the `packages` configuration property is simple:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation=drop-and-create
quarkus.hibernate-orm.packages=org.acme.model.defaultpu

quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".database.generation=drop-and-create
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".datasource=users
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".packages=org.acme.model.user
----

This configuration snippet will create two persistence units:

* The default one which will contain all the model classes under the `org.acme.model.defaultpu` package, subpackages included.
* A named `users` persistence unit which will contain all the model classes under the `org.acme.model.user` package, subpackages included.

You can attach several packages to a persistence unit:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.hibernate-orm."users".packages=org.acme.model.shared,org.acme.model.user
----

All the model classes under the `org.acme.model.shared` and `org.acme.model.user` packages will be attached to the `users` persistence unit.

It is also supported to attach a given model class to several persistence units.

[NOTE]
====
Model classes need to be consistently added to a given persistence unit.

> Meaning all dependent model classes of a given entity (mapped super classes, embeddables...) are required to be attached to the persistence unit.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
That meant that all dependent model classes of a given entity (mapped super classes, embeddables...) are required to be attached to the persistence unit.
```
